Year in Review Blog post (#944)
ropensci/roweb3: content/blog/2025-01-17-yearinreview2024/index.md

platform of choice for anchor community projects like
[Stan](https://discourse.mc-stan.org/t/announcement-stan-r-packages-repo-deprecated-moving-to-r-universe/35341),
[DuckDB](https://duckdb.org/docs/installation/index.html?version=main&environment=r),
and [Polars](https://pola-rs.github.io/r-polars/vignettes/install.html),
and we've seen the creation of new community initives that build on R-Universe,
like [R-Multiverse](https://r-multiverse.org/)!

For 2025, we have once again been awarded support by the R-Consortium, now
being [named a top-level consortium project](/blog/2024/12/03/r-universe-r-consortium-tlp/)! 
With this long-term support, we will be investing even more in making R-Universe
a platform that supports building large-scale, collaborative repositories that
experiment with new models for release, reproducibility, and governance.

## Software Peer Review

In 2024, rOpenSci’s software peer review program continued to grow, 
showcasing the commitment to improving software quality and 
validating R packages for a variety of applications. 

We’ve had **17** packages successfully complete software peer review with the help of about **33** reviewers 

> and **11** editors, with [2 new editors](/blog/2024/07/03/editors2024/).

Author: ```suggestion
and **11** editors, with [2 new editors](/blog/2024/07/03/editors2024/). We also did the [first bilingual review](https://github.com/ropensci/software-review/issues/620) in English and Spanish. 
```

> and **11** editors, with [2 new editors](/blog/2024/07/03/editors2024/). We also did the [first bilingual review](https://github.com/ropensci/software-review/issues/620) in English and Spanish. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and **11** editors, with [three](/authors/emi-tanaka) new [editors](/blog/2024/07/03/editors2024/). We also did the [first bilingual review](https://github.com/ropensci/software-review/issues/620) in English and Spanish. 
```

> and **11** editors, with [three](/authors/emi-tanaka) new [editors](/blog/2024/07/03/editors2024/). We also did the [first bilingual review](https://github.com/ropensci/software-review/issues/620) in English and Spanish. 

Author: As we don't mention any person in the blog I would like to keep it that way. Other way we are not fare with the rest of the people that volunteer and do so much work for rOpenSci.

> and **11** editors, with [three](/authors/emi-tanaka) new [editors](/blog/2024/07/03/editors2024/). We also did the [first bilingual review](https://github.com/ropensci/software-review/issues/620) in English and Spanish. 

Reviewer 2: I suppose so perhaps don't link to anything then? That way the link to Emi's author page doesn't seem odd (it doesn't say anything about being an editor, so I found it a bit confusing). 

Or leave it as is, not my favourite, but not the end of the world.

We also streamlined the review process and provided transparency through regular updates
on the number of submissions, approvals, 
and the status of packages under review were shared through newsletters, 
our Slack and our open GitHub organization.
We built a new [dashboard](https://dashboard.ropensci.org/) to monitor the health and responsiveness of our system for authors, reviewers, and editors.
Peer review remains a cornerstone of how we maintain quality and reproducibility in R software development
and how we build community.

In the year ahead, we are going to keep pusing our tooling to make review more

> efficient and helpful, and we have goals of doing more to make the
> process of software peer-review a tool that other organizations can use to curate
> their own software ecosystems and build collaborations and community.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
efficient and helpful, and we have plans to do more to make our
software peer-review process a tool that other organizations can use to curate
their own software ecosystems and build collaborations and community.
```

## Multilingual Resources

> In 2024, we to expanded our multilingual resources. We finished translating

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In 2024, we worked hard to expanded our multilingual resources. We finished translating
```

our core resource, the ["rOpenSci Packages: Development, Maintenance, and Peer Review" 
into Spanish](/blog/2024/03/11/devguide-0.9.0/). This has been the central project
around which we developed our multilingual toolkit, including packages like

> [babeldown](https://docs.ropensci.org/babeldown/),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[babeldown](https://docs.ropensci.org/babeldown/) and
```

[babelquarto](https://docs.ropensci.org/babelquarto/), that facilitate LLM-supported

> translation workflows, and
> our [rOpenSci Localization and Translation Guidelines](/blog/2024/12/17/localization-guide/) 
> which we published in Spanish and English to assist our community as well as other groups in translating and localizing open science resources. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
translation workflows.
This work also led to our [rOpenSci Localization and Translation Guidelines](/blog/2024/12/17/localization-guide/) 
which we published in Spanish and English to assist our community as well as other groups in translating and localizing open science resources. 
```

> We have had a series of great community events on multilingual publishing, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We hosted a series of great community events on multilingual publishing, 
```

like our [first Portuguese Community Call](https://ropensci.org/commcalls/translation-portuguese/) and
[our first Traslathon](https://github.com/orgs/ropensci/projects/7), which reinforced the 
importance of breaking language barriers in open science. 

What's happening with translation in 2025? [Portuguese translations of the development guide are underway](https://github.com/orgs/ropensci/projects/7), 
supported by dedicated community volunteers. It’s been inspiring to see the enthusiasm from contributors 
and volunteers driving this effort forward, and we will be giving it an extra push with additional support of our
new [CZI-funded Latin America program](https://ropensci.org/blog/2024/10/10/czi-latam-grant/). We are also
in the midst of Spanish-language revisions of our website and Champions programs materials.

## Champions Program

We had an inspiring 2024 with the [second cohort of our Champions Program](/blog/2024/02/15/champions-program-champions-2024/). 
These leaders have tackled projects that span disciplines and geographies, 
driving open science and open data initiatives with creativity and 
local impact.

> Package development is the type of project most chosen by this group, 
> but other champions have taken on the challenge of becoming reviewer in our software peer-review community.

Reviewer 2: Multiple Champions were reviewers?
```suggestion
Package development is most common type of project tackled by our Champions, 
but some have also taken on the challenge of becoming reviewers in our software peer-review community.
```

> Multilingualism plays an important role in the Champions Program, 
> as part of their outreach activity, this year we have events and workshops
> in [Turkish](/events/rsr-learn-and-use/), 
> [Spanish](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YYfyBrQhMQc), 
> [Portuguese](https://www.eventbrite.cl/e/traducao-hackathon-traslaton-ropensci-tickets-1045507530167),
> Chinese and, of course, English.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Multilingualism plays an important role in the Champions Program, 
and this year, as part of their outreach activity, Champions put on events and workshops
in [Turkish](/events/rsr-learn-and-use/), 
[Spanish](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YYfyBrQhMQc), 
[Portuguese](https://www.eventbrite.cl/e/traducao-hackathon-traslaton-ropensci-tickets-1045507530167),
Chinese and, of course, English.
```

In 2025, we will run our first cohort of Champions with a fully Spanish-language

> curriculum, under the [we the support of our new Latin America funded by CZI](https://ropensci.org/blog/2024/10/10/czi-latam-grant/).

Author: ```suggestion
curriculum, under the [support of our new Latin America focus program, funded by CZI](https://ropensci.org/blog/2024/10/10/czi-latam-grant/).
```

> We are also excited to be working on new models and partnerships for the Champions
> to make the program more sustainable and self-supporting, and to be following up
> with our first Champions to better understand our long-term impact.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We are also excited to be working on new models and partnerships for the Champions Program
to make it more sustainable and self-supporting, and to be follow up
with our first cohort of Champions (2022-2023) to better understand the long-term impacts of this program.
```

## Community Engagement

> We have 219 contributors and 49 of those people made their first code contribution to rOpenSci during 2024! 
> Others shared new [use cases](/usecases/) to help package authors see how their work is 
> being used and help other users imagine how they can apply it.

Reviewer 2: Contributors to what? We have more than that many packages, so we definitely have more than that many code contributors... I'm not sure of these numbers.
```suggestion
This past year we've had many new code contributors to rOpenSci packages. We have 219 contributors and 49 of those people made their first code contribution to rOpenSci during 2024! 
Other community members shared new [use cases](/usecases/) to help package authors see how their work is 
being used and to help other users see how these packages might be used.
```

Author: Is the number in the annual report so I understand that are contribución to packages

Reviewer 2: From [this report](https://github.com/rosadmin/annual-reporting/blob/master/reports_annual/annual_report_2023-12-01_2024-11-30.md#number-of-contributors)? This seems to suggest that there have been 170 contributors in 2024 (or close enough, as it doesn't technically have Dec) and of those, 50 were new...

> Our blog had featured many different voices and experiences during 2024.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Our blog featured many different voices and experiences during 2024.
```

> We have a total of 35 community authors, of which 18 are first time community authors!

Reviewer 2: 35 posts but actually 37 authors, and 19 first time ([report](https://github.com/rosadmin/annual-reporting/blob/master/reports_annual/annual_report_2023-12-01_2024-11-30.md#number-of-blog-posts))
```suggestion
This year we featured 37 community authors, of which 19 posted for the first time!
```

Author: I run a report from January to December

Author: I will keep the original numbers because the report you use it is from December 1 2023 to November 30 2024 and I run a report from January 1 2024 to December 31 2024, that is why the numbers are different.

Reviewer 2: Makes sense! But the reporting tool didn't do it's end of December update (on my list of things to fix), but probably close enough 😁

> Counting our staff, 42 authors wrote 54 blog posts, 63% of which were written by community authors
> and 13% were multilingual.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Including our staff, 44 authors wrote 54 blog posts, 65% of which were written by community authors
and 11% were multilingual.
```

> We also celebrated our vibrant package ecosystem with the “A Package a Day” 

Author: ```suggestion
We also celebrated our vibrant package ecosystem with the [“A Package a Day”](https://hachyderm.io/@rOpenSci/tagged/APackageADay) 
```

> campaign on Mastodon and Weekly Package digests in LinkedIn. 

Author: ```suggestion
campaign on Mastodon and [Weekly Package Digests](https://www.linkedin.com/feed/hashtag/?keywords=packageweeklydigest&highlightedUpdateUrns=urn%3Ali%3Aactivity%3A7170464303186108416) in LinkedIn. 
```

These efforts showcased the incredible diversity of our over 

> 300 federated open-source packages.

Reviewer 2: Is "federated" the right word here? (I honestly don't know, I'm just used to seeing either in Star Trek or with reference to social media 😅 )

Author: Is what rOpenSci has said before in some talks.

> Community Calls and virtual social coworking and office hours 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Community Calls and virtual Social Coworking and Office Hours 
```

> brought together people from at least 20 countries to learn,

Reviewer 2: ?
```suggestion
brought together people from over 20 countries to learn,
```

get their own work done 

> and to join in some spirited scavenger hunts! 

Reviewer 2: ❤️

Many others have continued to [read our newsletter](https://ropensci.org/news/), 
cite our software, 
[ask or answer questions](https://discuss.ropensci.org), 
open issues to report bugs or request features, 
weigh in on standards and best practices, 
invited us [to talk about our work](https://ropensci.org/talks-papers/), 

> or mentioned us in a presentation, a post, or social media.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
or mentione us in presentations, posts, or social media.
```

> We will do all of this and more in 2025. We are starting with a [Community Call](/commcalls/first-time-contributor/) 

Reviewer 2: Technically, most of this was what our community was doing ;) 
```suggestion
We will continue to support our community's amazing contributions and plan to offer even more opportunities to get involved in 2025. We started with a [Community Call](/commcalls/first-time-contributor/) 
```

> and a series of [mini-hackathons](/coworking/) 
> during our co-working session to support first-time contributors 
> to open source projects.
> These calls provided invaluable opportunities for 
> knowledge-sharing, networking and skill-up opportunity in a
> safe and friendly space underscoring the collaborative spirit of rOpenSci.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and will continue with a series of [mini-hackathons](/coworking/) 
during our co-working sessions to support first-time contributors 
to open source projects.
These events will provide opportunities for 
knowledge-sharing, networking and up-skilling in a
safe and friendly space encompasing the collaborative spirit of rOpenSci.
```

> We are also looking forward to collaborations with partners
> and other communities, like Epiverse, RECON, data.org, LatinR, PyOpenSci, 
> OpenScapes and Open-Source Program offices. Watch this space for new projects and events!

Reviewer 2: Link to all these groups?
```suggestion
We are also looking forward to collaborations with partners
and other communities, like Epiverse, RECON, data.org, LatinR, PyOpenSci, 
OpenScapes and other Open-Source Program offices. Watch this space for new projects and events!
```

## Leadership

> In 2024 we [bade farewell to Karthk Ram, our co-founder and Executive Director of 13 years](/blog/2024/03/29/from-the-founding-director-my-farewell-to-ropensci/).
> Noam Ross, formerly our leader for peer-review, [took on the role](/blog/2024/03/29/hello-from-our-new-executive-director/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In 2024 we [bade farewell to Karthik Ram, our co-founder and Executive Director of 13 years](/blog/2024/03/29/from-the-founding-director-my-farewell-to-ropensci/) and welcomed
Noam Ross, formerly our leader for peer-review, [into the role](/blog/2024/03/29/hello-from-our-new-executive-director/).
```

## Thanks to our Community

> An enormous **thank you to all our authors, reviewers, editors, mentors, champions

Author: ```suggestion
An enormous **thank you to all our authors, maintainers, reviewers, editors, mentors, champions
```

> An enormous **thank you to all our authors, maintainers, reviewers, editors, mentors, champions
> contributors, commenters, bloggers, translators, bug-reporters, documentation-copy-editors,
> package-publishers, and issue-filers for _making_ rOpenSci** in 2024.  rOpenSci _is_ our community.
> We grateful for it all and look forward to what we will do together in 2025!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An enormous thank you to all our **authors, maintainers, reviewers, editors, mentors, Champions
package contributors, commenters, bloggers, translators, bug-reporters, documentation-copy-editors,
package-publishers, issue-filers, and event-attendees** for giving rOpenSci an amazing 2024.  rOpenSci _is_ our community.
We are grateful for it all and look forward to what we will do together in 2025!
```

---
slug: "year-in-review-2024"
title: rOpenSci 2024 Highlights
author:

>   - Yanina Bellini Saibene

Reviewer 3: is the kind of post where we should use "The rOpenSci Team" as author?

Author: Yes!!

>   - Yanina Bellini Saibene

Author: ```suggestion
  - The rOpenSci Team
```

date: 2025-01-17
tags:
  - community
# The summary below will be used by e.g. Mastodon preview cards
description: "A summary of the highlights of the rOpenSci community in 2024 and some news for 2025."
social: "A summary of the highlights of the rOpenSci community in 2024 and some news for 2025."
# this field is for the storing the name(s) of the editor(s) of your post
# you can leave it empty until you know who'll review your PR
editor:
  - Steffi LaZerte

---

> In 2024, we worked towards our commitment to open science and open source software. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In 2024, we remained committed to open science and open source software. 
```

We continued to build a welcoming and 
inclusive community, through innovation and collaboration. 

Here are the highlights of the year:

## Leadership Transition

We went through a leadership transition, 
[Karthik Ram stepped down as Executive Director](/blog/2024/03/29/from-the-founding-director-my-farewell-to-ropensci/) 
after 13 years of service, 

> [transitioning the role to Noam Ross](/blog/2024/03/29/hello-from-our-new-executive-director/), 

Reviewer 3: can one transition a role?

Author: Oh, perhaps it is not the best word. I will let this be decided for the native speakers.

ensuring continued focus on strategic goals and community impact.

> ## R-Universe Advancements

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## R-Universe Progress
```

R-Universe, rOpenSci's platform for finding and publishing R packages,
saw major advancements in 2024, 
making it an increasingly useful and trusted resource for the wider R community.

> Some of the highlights included big rewrite of the [web frontend](https://r-universe.dev) 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Some of the highlights included a big rewrite of the [web frontend](https://r-universe.dev) 
```

and search engine to serve faster, beautiful, informative webpages, and 
search through tens of thousands [packages](https://r-universe.dev/packages),
[articles](https://r-universe.dev/articles) and [datasets](https://r-universe.dev/datasets). 
On the build side we added support for new tools like Rust and Quarto,
and improved the process of building binaries for WebAssembly and Apple Silicon.

These enhancements have resulted in a big uptake in traffic and interest from the community, 
which was rewarded by the R consortium by [naming R-Universe a Top-Level Project](/blog/2024/12/03/r-universe-r-consortium-tlp/), ensuring support for at least three more years.
We are very grateful for this recognition, and look forward to further 
develop and maintain R-universe to serve greater R community.

> Moreover, we received a Google Season of Docs grant, aimed at centralizing the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Moreover, we received a [Google Season of Docs grant](/blog/2024/04/12/gsod-announcement/), aimed at centralizing the
```

> documentation. The project focused on consolidating numerous tech notes and READMEs 

Reviewer 3: the linebreaks are not ideal :wink:

Author: I have all the intention to use your package and then I didn't... :-(

and the status of packages under review were shared through newsletters, 
our Slack and our open GitHub organization. 
Peer review remains a cornerstone of how we maintain quality and reproducibility in R software development
and how we build community.

## Multilingual Resources

In 2024, rOpenSci continued to expand its multilingual resources, 
the ["rOpenSci Packages: Development, Maintenance, and Peer Review" 
guide was updated to include Spanish translations](/blog/2024/03/11/devguide-0.9.0/). 
Additionally, [Portuguese translations are underway](https://github.com/orgs/ropensci/projects/7), 
supported by dedicated community volunteers.

We continue de development of tools like 
[babeldown](https://docs.ropensci.org/babeldown/),
[babelquarto](https://docs.ropensci.org/babelquarto/) and
our [rOpenSci Localization and Translation Guidelines](/blog/2024/12/17/localization-guide/) 
in Spanish and English to assist our community, 
but also other groups in translating and localizing open science resources. 

Community discussions on multilingual publishing, 
like our [first Portuguese Community Call](https://ropensci.org/commcalls/translation-portuguese/) and

> our first _Traslathon_, reinforced the 

Reviewer 3: add a link?

Author: I don't have a link to the traslaton but I can add a link to the translation repo/project...

importance of breaking language barriers in open science. 

It’s been inspiring to see the enthusiasm from contributors 
and volunteers driving this effort forward.

> We also shared our experiences and tools in several conferences 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We also shared our experiences and tools in several [conferences](/talks/) 
```

(and several languages) and also discussed the importance 
of multilingual computing materials in an episode of 
the ["Code for Thought" podcast](https://codeforthought.buzzsprout.com/1326658/14660478-en-crossing-the-language-barrier-yanina-saibene).

## Champions Program

The [second cohort of the Champions Program](/blog/2024/02/15/champions-program-champions-2024/) has been inspiring. 
These leaders have tackled projects that span disciplines and geographies, 
driving open science and open data initiatives with creativity and 
local impact.

Package development is the type of project most chosen by this group, 

> but we have champions who have also been reviewers for our peer-review.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
but other champions have been reviewers for our software peer review system.
```

Multilingualism plays an important role in the Champions Program, 
as part of their outreach activity, this year we have events and workshops
in [Turkish](/events/rsr-learn-and-use/), 
[Spanish](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YYfyBrQhMQc), 
[Portuguese](https://www.eventbrite.cl/e/traducao-hackathon-traslaton-ropensci-tickets-1045507530167),
Chinese and, of course,
English.

Finally, [we got the support of the CZI program to continue with the
Champions Program with a regional focus in Latin America](https://ropensci.org/blog/2024/10/10/czi-latam-grant/), carrying out
the program in Spanish and Portuguese.

We are excited to see the impact of our Champions' projects 
and the new cohort of Champions in 2025.

## Community Engagement

We have 219 contributors and 49 of those people made their first code contribution to rOpenSci during 2024! 

> Others shared xx new use cases to help package authors see how their work is 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Others shared xx new [use cases](/usecases/) to help package authors see how their work is 
```

being used and help other users imagine how they can apply it.

Our blog had featured many different voices and experiences during 2024.
We have a total of 35 community authors, of which 18 are first time community authors!
Counting our staff, 42 authors wrote 54 blog posts, 63% of which were written by community authors
and 13% were multilingual.

We also celebrated our vibrant package ecosystem with the “A Package a Day” 
campaign on Mastodon and Weekly Package digests in LinkedIn. 
These efforts showcased the incredible diversity of our over 
300 federated open-source packages.

Community Calls and virtual social coworking and office hours 

> brought together people from at least 20 countries to leanr,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
brought together people from at least 20 countries to learn,
```

## 5. Champions Program

The [second cohort of the Champions Program](/blog/2024/02/15/champions-program-champions-2024/) has been inspiring. 
These leaders have tackled projects that span disciplines and geographies, 
driving open science and open data initiatives with creativity and 
local impact.

Package development is the type of project most chosen by this group, 
but we have champions who have also been reviewers for our peer-review.

Multilingualism plays an important role in the Champions Program, 
as part of their outreach activity, this year we have events and workshops
in [Turkish](/events/rsr-learn-and-use/), 
[Spanish](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YYfyBrQhMQc), 
[Portuguese](https://www.eventbrite.cl/e/traducao-hackathon-traslaton-ropensci-tickets-1045507530167),
Chinese and, of course,
English.

Finally, [we got the support of the CZI program to continue with the
Champions Program with a regional focus in Latin America](https://ropensci.org/blog/2024/10/10/czi-latam-grant/), carrying out
the program in Spanish and Portuguese.

We are excited to see the impact of our Champions' projects 
and the new cohort of Champions in 2025.

> ## 6. Community Engagement

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Community Engagement
```
